LIGO: The Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory 
The goal of the Laser Interferometric Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) is to detect and study gravitational waves of astrophysical origin. Direct detection of gravitational waves holds the promise of testing general relativity in the strong-field regime, of providing a new probe of exotic objects such as black holes and neutron stars, and of uncovering unanticipated new astrophysics. LIGO, a joint Caltech-MIT project supported by the National Science Foundation, operates three multi-kilometer interferometers at two widely separated sites in the United States. These detectors are the result of decades of worldwide technology development, design, construction, and commissioning. They are now operating at their design sensitivity, and are sensitive to gravitational wave strains smaller than one part in 1021. With this unprecedented sensitivity, the data are being analyzed to detect or place limits on gravitational waves from a variety of potential astrophysical sources. 
The prediction of gravitational waves (GWs), oscillations in the space-time metric that propagate at the speed of light, is one of the most profound differences between Einstein’s general theory of relativity and the Newtonian theory of gravity that it replaced. GWs remained a theoretical prediction for more than 50 years until the first observational evidence for their existence came with the discovery and subsequent observations of the binary pulsar PSR 1913+16, by Russell Hulse and Joseph Taylor. This is a system of two neutron stars that orbit each other with a period of 7.75 hours. Precise timing of radio pulses emitted by one of the neutron stars, monitored now over several decades, shows that their orbital period is slowly decreasing at just the rate predicted for the general-relativistic emission of GWs. Hulse and Taylor were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics for this work in 1993. 
In about 300 million years, the PSR 1913+16 orbit will decrease to the point where the pair coalesces into a single compact object, a process that will produce directly detectable gravitational waves. In the meantime, the direct detection of GWs will require similarly strong sources – extremely large masses moving with large accelerations in strong gravitational fields. The goal of LIGO, the Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory is just that: to detect and study GWs of astrophysical origin. Achieving this goal will mark the opening of a new window on the universe, with the promise of new physics and astrophysics. In physics, GW detection could provide information about strong-field gravitation, the untested domain of strongly curved space where Newtonian gravitation is no longer even a poor approximation. In astrophysics, the sources of GWs that LIGO might detect include binary neutron stars (like PSR 1913+16 but much later in their evolution); binary systems where a black hole replaces one or both of the neutron stars; a stellar core collapse which triggers a Type II supernova; rapidly rotating, non-axisymmetric neutron stars; and possibly processes in the early universe that produce a stochastic background of GWs. 
In the past few years the field has reached a milestone, with decades-old plans to build and operate large interferometric GW detectors now realized in several locations worldwide. This article focuses on LIGO, which operates the most sensitive detectors yet built. We aim to describe the LIGO detectors and how they operate, explain how they have achieved their remarkable sensitivity, and review how their data can be used to learn about a variety of astrophysical phenomena. 
The essence of general relativity is that mass and energy produce a curvature of four-dimensional space-time, and that matter moves in response to this curvature. The Einstein field equations prescribe the interaction between mass and space time curvature, much as Maxwell’s equations prescribe the relationship between electric charge and electromagnetic fields. Just as electromagnetic waves are time-dependent vacuum solutions to Maxwell’s equations, gravitational waves are time dependent vacuum solutions to the field equations. Gravitational waves are oscillating perturbations to a flat, or Minkowski, space-time metric, and can be thought of equivalently as an oscillating strain in space-time or as an oscillating tidal force between free test masses. 
As with electromagnetic waves, gravitational waves travel at the speed of light and are transverse in character – i.e., the strain oscillations occur in directions orthogonal to the direction the wave is propagating. Whereas electromagnetic waves are dipolar in nature, gravitational waves are quadrupolar: the strain pattern contracts space along one transverse dimension, while expanding it along the orthogonal direction in the transverse plane (see Fig. 1). Gravitational radiation is produced by oscillating multipole moments of the mass distribution of a system. The principle of mass conservation rules out monopole radiation, and the principles of linear and angular momentum conservation rule out gravitational dipole radiation. Quadrupole radiation is the lowest allowed form, and is thus usually the dominant form. In this case, the gravitational wave field strength is proportional to the second time derivative of the quadrupole moment of the source, and it falls off in amplitude inversely with distance from the source. The tensor character of gravity – the hypothetical graviton is a spin-2 particle – means that the transverse strain field comes in two orthogonal polarizations. These are commonly expressed in a linear polarization basis as the ‘+’ polarization (depicted in Fig. 1) and the ‘×’ polarization, reflecting the fact that they are rotated 45 degrees relative to one another. An astrophysical GW will, in general, be a mixture of both polarizations. 
Gravitational waves differ from electromagnetic waves in that they propagate essentially unperturbed through space, as they interact only very weakly with matter. Furthermore, gravitational waves are intrinsically non-linear, because the wave energy density itself generates additional curvature of space-time. This phenomenon is only significant, however, very close to strong sources of waves, where the wave amplitude is relatively large. More usually, gravitational waves distinguish themselves from electromagnetic waves by the fact that they are very weak. One cannot hope to detect any waves of terrestrial origin, whether naturally occurring or manmade; instead one must look to very massive compact astrophysical objects, moving at relativistic velocities. For example, strong sources of gravitational waves that may exist in our galaxy or nearby galaxies are expected to produce wave strengths on Earth that do not exceed strain levels of one part in 1021. Finally, it is important to appreciate that GW detectors respond directly to GW amplitude rather than GW power; therefore the volume of space that is probed for potential sources increases as the cube of the strain sensitivity. 
Figure 1. A gravitational wave traveling perpendicular to the plane of the diagram is characterized by a strain amplitude h. The wave distorts a ring of test particles into an ellipse, elongated in one direction in one half-cycle of the wave, and elongated in the orthogonal direction in the next half-cycle. This oscillating distortion can be measured with a Michelson interferometer oriented as shown. The length oscillations modulate the phase shifts accrued by the light in each arm, which are in turn observed as light intensity modulations at the photodetector (green semi-circle). This depicts one of the linear polarization modes of the GW. 
As illustrated in Fig. 1, the oscillating quadrupolar strain pattern of a GW is well matched by a Michelson interferometer, which makes a very sensitive comparison of the lengths of its two orthogonal arms. LIGO utilizes three specialized Michelson interferometers, located at two sites (see Fig. 2): an observatory on the Hanford site in Washington houses two interferometers, the 4 km-long H1 and 2 km-long H2 detectors; and an observatory in Livingston Parish, Louisiana, houses the 4 km-long L1 detector. Other than the shorter length of H2, the three interferometers are essentially identical. Multiple detectors at separated sites are crucial for rejecting instrumental and environmental artifacts in the data, by requiring coincident detections in the analysis. Also, because the antenna pattern of an interferometer is quite wide, source localization requires triangulation using three separated detectors. 
The initial LIGO detectors were designed to be sensitive to GWs in the frequency band 40 – 7000 Hz, and capable of detecting a GW strain amplitude as small as 10−21. With funding from the National Science Foundation, the LIGO sites and detectors were designed by scientists and engineers from the California Institute of Technology and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, constructed in the late 1990s, and commissioned over the first 5 years of this decade. From November 2005 through September 2007, they operated at their design sensitivity in a continuous data-taking mode. The data from this science run, known as S5, are being analyzed for a variety of GW signals by a group of researchers known as the LIGO Scientific Collaboration. At the most sensitive frequencies, the instrument root-mean-square (rms) strain noise has reached an unprecedented level of 3 × 10−22 in a 100 Hz band. 
Figure 2. Aerial photograph of the LIGO observatories at Hanford, Washington (top) and Livingston, Louisiana (bottom). The lasers and optics are contained in the white and blue buildings. From the large corner building, evacuated beam tubes extend at right angles for 4 km in each direction (the full length of only one of the arms is seen in each photo); the tubes are covered by the arched, concrete enclosures seen here. 
Although in principle LIGO can detect and study GWs by itself, the potential to do astrophysics can be quantitatively and qualitatively enhanced by operation in a more extensive network. For example, the direction of travel of the GWs and the complete polarization information carried by the waves can only be extracted by a network of detectors. Such a global network of GW observatories has been emerging over the past decade. In this period, the Japanese TAMA project built a 300 m interferometer outside Tokyo, Japan; the German-British GEO project built a 600 m interferometer near Hanover, Germany; and the European Gravitational Observatory built the 3 km-long interferometer Virgo near Pisa, Italy. In addition, plans are underway to develop a large scale gravitational wave detector in Japan sometime during the next decade.
Early in its operation LIGO joined with the GEO project; for strong sources the shorter, less sensitive GEO 600 detector provides added confidence and directional and polarization information. In May 2007 the Virgo detector began joint observations with LIGO, with a strain sensitivity close to that of LIGO’s 4 km interferometers at frequencies above ∼ 1 kHz. The LIGO Scientific Collaboration and the Virgo Collaboration negotiated an agreement that all data collected from that date are to be analyzed and published jointly. 
Figure 1 illustrates the basic concept of how a Michelson interferometer is used to measure a GW strain. The challenge is to make the instrument sufficiently sensitive: at the targeted strain sensitivity of 10−21, the resulting arm length change is only ∼10−18 m, a thousand times smaller than the diameter of a proton. Meeting this challenge involves the use of special interferometry techniques, state-of-the-art optics, highly stable lasers, and multiple layers of vibration isolation, all of which are described in the sections that follow. And of course a key feature of the detectors is simply their scale: the arms are made as long as practically possible to increase the signal due to a GW strain. See Table 1 for a list of the main design parameters of the LIGO interferometers. 
The LIGO detectors are Michelson interferometers whose mirrors also serve as gravitational test masses. A passing gravitational wave will impress a phase modulation on the light in each arm of the Michelson, with a relative phase shift of 180 degrees between the arms. When the Michelson arm lengths are set such that the un-modulated light interferes destructively at the antisymmetric (AS) port – the dark fringe condition – the phase modulated sideband light will interfere constructively, with an amplitude proportional to GW strain and the input power. With dark fringe operation, the full power incident on the beamsplitter is returned to the laser at the symmetric port. Only differential motion of the arms appears at the AS port; common mode signals are returned to the laser with the carrier light. 
Figure 3. Optical and sensing configuration of the LIGO 4 km interferometers (the laser power numbers here are generic; specific power levels are given in Table 1). The IO block includes laser frequency and amplitude stabilization, and electro-optic phase modulators. The power recycling cavity is formed between the PRM and the two ITMs, and contains the BS. The inset photo shows an input test mass mirror in its pendulum suspension. The near face has a highly reflective coating for the infrared laser light, but transmits visible light. Through it one can see mirror actuators arranged in a square pattern near the mirror perimeter. 
Two modifications to a basic Michelson, shown in Fig. 3, increase the carrier power in the arms and hence the GW sensitivity. First, each arm contains a resonant Fabry-Perot optical cavity made up of a partially transmitting input mirror and a high reflecting end mirror. The cavities cause the light to effectively bounce back and forth multiple times in the arms, increasing the carrier power and phase shift for a given strain amplitude. In the LIGO detectors the Fabry-Perot cavities multiply the signal by a factor of 100 for a 100 Hz GW. Second, a partially-reflecting mirror is placed between the laser and beamsplitter to implement power recycling. In this technique, an optical cavity is formed between the power recycling mirror and the Michelson symmetric port. By matching the transmission of the recycling mirror to the optical losses in the Michelson, and resonating this recycling cavity, the laser power stored in the interferometer can be significantly increased. In this configuration, known as a power recycled Fabry-Perot Michelson, the LIGO interferometers increase the power in the arms by a factor of ≈ 8, 000 with respect to a simple Michelson. 
The laser source is a diode-pumped, Nd:YAG master oscillator and power amplifier system, and emits 10 W in a single frequency at 1064 nm. The laser power and frequency are actively stabilized, and passively filtered with a transmissive ring cavity (pre-mode cleaner, PMC). The laser power stabilization is implemented by directing a sample of the beam to a photodetector, filtering its signal and feeding it back to the power amplifier; this servo stabilizes the relative power fluctuations of the beam to ∼ 10−7/√Hz at 100 Hz. The laser frequency stabilization is done in multiple stages that are more fully described in later sections. The first, or pre-stabilization stage uses the traditional technique of servo locking the laser frequency to an isolated reference cavity using the Pound-Drever-Hall (PDH) technique, in this case via
feedback to frequency actuators on the master oscillator and to an electro-optic phase modulator. The servo bandwith is 500 kHz, and the pre-stabilization achieves a stability level of ∼ 10−2 Hz/√Hz at 100 Hz. The PMC transmits the pre-stabilized beam, filtering out both any light not in the fundamental Gaussian spatial mode and laser noise at frequencies above a few MHz. The PMC output beam is weakly phase modulated with two radio-frequency (RF) sine waves, producing, to first-order, two pairs of sideband fields around the carrier field; these RF sideband fields are used in a heterodyne detection system described below. 
After phase modulation, the beam passes into the LIGO vacuum system. All the main interferometer optical components and beam paths are enclosed in the ultra high vacuum system (10−8 – 10−9torr) for acoustical isolation and to reduce phase fluctuations from light scattering off residual gas. The long beam tubes are particularly noteworthy components of the LIGO vacuum system. These 1.2 m diameter, 4 km long stainless steel tubes were designed to have low-outgassing so that the required vacuum could be attained by pumping only from the ends of the tubes. This was achieved by special processing of the steel to remove hydrogen, followed by an in-situ bakeout of the spiral-welded tubes, for approximately 20 days at 160 C. 
The in-vacuum beam first passes through the mode cleaner (MC), a 12 m long, vibrationally isolated transmissive ring cavity. The MC provides a stable, diffraction limited beam with additional filtering of laser noise above several kilohertz, and it serves as an intermediate reference for frequency stabilization. The MC length and modulation frequencies are matched so that the main carrier field and the modulation sideband fields all pass through the MC. After the MC is a Faraday isolator and a reflective 3-mirror telescope that expands the beam and matches it to the arm cavity mode. 
The interferometer optics, including the test masses, are fused-silica substrates with multilayer dielectric coatings, manufactured to have extremely low scatter and low absorption. The test mass substrates are polished so that the surface deviation from a spherical figure, over the central 80 mm diameter, is typically 5 angstroms or smaller, and the surface microroughness is typically less than 2 angstroms. The mirror coatings are made using ion-beam sputtering, a technique known for producing ultralow-loss mirrors [17, 18]. The absorption level in the coatings is generally a few parts-per-million (ppm) or less, and the total scattering loss from a mirror surface is estimated to be 60 – 70 ppm. 
In addition to being a source of optical loss, scattered light can be a problematic noise source, if it is allowed to reflect or scatter from a vibrating surface (such as a vacuum system wall) and recombine with the main beam. Since the vibrating, re-scattering surface may be moving by ∼ 10 orders of magnitude more than the test masses, very small levels of scattered light can contaminate the output. To control this, various baffles are employed within the vacuum system to trap scattered light [20, 21]. Each 4 km long beam tube contains approximately two hundred baffles to trap light scattered at small angles from the test masses. These baffles are stainless steel truncated cones, with serrated inner edges, distributed so as to completely hide the beam tube from the line of sight of any arm cavity mirror. Additional baffles within the vacuum chambers prevent light outside the mirror apertures from hitting the vacuum chamber walls. 
Table 1. Parameters of the LIGO interferometers. H1 and H2 refer to the interferometers at Hanford, Washington, and L1 is the interferometer at Livingston Parish, Louisiana. 
Starting with the MC, each mirror in the beam line is suspended as a pendulum by a loop of steel wire. The pendulum provides f−2 vibration isolation above its eigenfrequencies, allowing free movement of a test mass in the GW frequency band. Along the beam direction, a test mass pendulum isolates by a factor of nearly 2 × 104 at 100 Hz. The position and orientation of a suspended optic is controlled by electromagnetic actuators: small magnets are bonded to the optic and coils are mounted to the suspension support structure, positioned to maximize the magnetic force and minimize ground noise coupling. The actuator assemblies also contain optical sensors that measure the position of the suspended optic with respect to its support structure. These signals are used to actively damp eigenmodes of the suspension. 
The bulk of the vibration isolation in the GW band is provided by four-layer mass spring isolation stacks, to which the pendulums are mounted. These stacks provide approximately f−8isolation above ∼10 Hz, giving an isolation factor of about 108 at 100 Hz. In addition, the L1 detector, subject to higher environmental ground motion than the Hanford detectors, employs seismic pre-isolators between the ground and the isolation stacks. These active isolators employ a collection of motion sensors, hydraulic
actuators, and servo controls; the pre-isolators actively suppress vibrations in the band 0.1 − 10 Hz, by as much as a factor of 10 in the middle of the band. 
The two Fabry-Perot arms and power recycling cavities are essential to achieving the LIGO sensitivity goal, but they require an active feedback system to maintain the interferometer at the proper operating point. The round trip length of each cavity must be held to an integer multiple of the laser wavelength so that newly introduced carrier light interferes constructively with light from previous round trips. Under these conditions the light inside the cavities builds up and they are said to be on resonance. In addition to the three cavity lengths, the Michelson phase must be controlled to ensure that the AS port remains on the dark fringe. 
The four lengths are sensed with a variation of the PDH reflection scheme. In standard PDH, an error signal is generated through heterodyne detection of the light reflected from a cavity. The RF phase modulation sidebands are directly reflected from the cavity input mirror and serve as a local oscillator to mix with the carrier field. The carrier experiences a phase-shift in reflection, turning the RF phase modulation into RF amplitude modulation, linear in amplitude for small deviations from resonance. This concept is extended to the full interferometer as follows. At the operating point, the carrier light is resonant in the arm and recycling cavities and on a Michelson dark fringe. The RF sideband fields resonate differently. One pair of RF sidebands (from phase modulation at 62.5 MHz) is not resonant and simply reflects from the recycling mirror. The other pair (25 MHz phase modulation) is resonant in the recycling cavity but not in the arm cavities.‡ The Michelson mirrors are positioned to make one arm 30 cm longer than the other so that these RF sidebands are not on a Michelson dark fringe. By design this Michelson asymmetry is chosen so that most of the resonating RF sideband power is coupled to the AS port. 
In this configuration, heterodyne error signals for the four length degrees-of-freedom are extracted from the three output ports shown in Fig. 3 (REF, PO and AS ports). The AS port is heterodyned at the resonating RF frequency and gives an error signal proportional to differential arm length changes, including those due to a GW. The PO port is a sample of the recycling cavity beam, and is detected at the resonating RF frequency to give error signals for the recycling cavity length and the Michelson phase (using both RF quadratures). The REF port is detected at the non-resonating RF frequency and gives a standard PDH signal proportional to deviations in the laser frequency relative to the average length of the two arms. 
Feedback controls derived from these errors signals are applied to the two end mirrors to stabilize the differential arm length, to the beamsplitter to control the Michelson phase, and to the recycling mirror to control the recycling cavity length. The feedback signals are applied directly to the mirrors through their coil-magnet actuators, with slow corrections for the differential arm length applied with longer-range actuators that move the whole isolation stack. 
